# Elasticsearch
- Distributed, RESTful platform used for searching information
- Allows users to log, store, search, and analyse data
	- Maintains high performance for high volumes of data
- Works by indexing data

## Use cases
- Observability
	- Logs, metrics, and traces.
	- Application performance monitoring (APM)
	- Real user monitoring (RUM): Monitor user interactions with web apps
	- `OpenTelemetry`: Reuse existing instrumentation to send telemetry data using `OpenTelemetry` standard
- Search
	- Full-text search: Text Search using inverted indexes, tokenization, and text analysis
	- Vector databases: Store vectorized data and create vector embeddings with NLP models.
	- Semantic search: Understand meaning of search queries using e.g. synonyms or dense vector embeddings
	- Hybrid search: Combine full-text with vector search using ranking algorithms
	- Build search experiences: Add hybrid search to apps/websites
	- Retrieval augmented generation (RAG): Retrieval engine to supplement gen AI models.
	- Geospatial search: Search for locations and calculate spatial relationships using geospatial queries
- Security:
	- Security Information and Event management (SIEM): Collect, store and analyse security data from apps, system and services.
	- Endpoint security: Monitor and analyse endpoint security data
	- Thread hunting: Search and analyse data to respond to threats.

## Indices
- Index is the fundamental unit of storage
- It's a collection of documents uniquely identified by a name or an alias.
	- Can be seen as a logical namespace for storing data that shares similar characteristics.
	- The name is used to target the index in search queries
	- Index is optimized for append-only timestamped data

## Documents and fields
- Data is stored as JSON documents
	- Each document is a set of fields, which are key-value pairs
	- A unique ID is auto-generated by ES to identify the document.

## Metadata fields
- Indexed documents contain data and metadata
- Metadata fields are system fields
	- Store information about documents
	- Are prefixed with underscore
- Examples:
	- `_index`: The name of the index where the document is stored.
	- `_id`: The document’s ID. IDs must be unique per index.

## Mapping and data types
- Each index has a mapping for how the fields are indexed in the documents
- Mapping defines
	- The data type for each field
	- How it should be indexed
	- How it should be stored
- Two types of mappings:
	- Dynamic mapping: Elasticsearch automatically detects the data types and creates the mappings. Can lead to suboptimal results due to automatic field type inference
	- Explicit mapping: Define mappings up front by specifying data types for each field

## Underneath the skin
- It can be seen as an API to many Lucene shards
- Instead of users having to figure out to which shard to connect/store the data to, Elasticsearch does it on its own.
- A group of related shards is presented to the user as an index.
	- An index is a group of related Lucene shards.


---
# Sources
- https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/elasticsearch-intro.html

---

Related to: 
- [search](search)